A brief essay on [Widening Access to Applied Machine Learning with TinyML](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2106.04008.pdf), by mtxslv:


It is known that the more significant parts of ML practitioners and resources are siloed in a few countries and organizations. Acknowledging it, in order to increase access to applied ML, it was developed a new pedagogical approach to widen access to AI: encouraging the end-to-end development of applications using TinyML (or Machine Learning on resource-constrained embedded devices). This free course is available on the edX MOOC platform, and it was designed such that students can take it from different backgrounds (from industry veterans to hobbyists) and from anywhere on the planet.  Furthermore, the participants can audit the course for free or pay to earn a professional certificate.  

The course design comprises three foundational courses (that focus on designing, developing, and deploying TinyML applications on a device) and one advanced, optional course. The first one (Fundamentals of TinyML) present the students with the world of TinyML while showing them the basic concepts of embedded systems and Machine Learning. The second course provides the student with practical TinyML applications (which differs from traditional ML because TinyML is about real-time processing of time-series data streaming from sensors). Deploying TinyML is the third course and it focuses on demonstrating the complete ML workflow. Opposite the two previous courses, this one uses Arduino’s Tiny Machine Learning Kit. At last, course four considers scaled management of TinyML-application deployments.

People learn differently. So, in order to support different learning styles, the course implemented a set of methods. It mixes video lectures, short readings, quizzes, and coding exercises. Thus, visual, auditory, and experiential participants all learn by their preferred method. The videos are short, and the code exercises contain introductions and comments. Forums are available also, such that students can question and answer one another, besides creating a community around the course.

Since the course is based on a hands-on approach, it needed a self-contained, representative, and globally accessible TinyML platform. Then it was designed, in partnership with Arduino, the Tiny Machine Learning Kit. The Arduino Nano 33 BLE Sense was selected, and it contains numerous sensors (microphone, temperature, humidity, pressure, vibration, orientation, color, brightness, proximity, gesture, etc). A shield was developed such that other (like the OV7675 camera module) sensors could be integrated for future projects.

Besides the features TinyML has by default, it allows the course to incorporate responsible AI into all four ML stages (design, development, deployment, and scaling). Thus, by embedding ethics into each TinyML course, the technology’s ethical and social dimensions are communicated. Ethics is introduced in designing by anticipating the effects of ML projects and how to ensure equitable access to these technologies. During development, Ethics is seen in how data-collection bias and fairness affect application behavior. Actually, data collection, bias, and fairness intertwine, so it is important to see how to mitigate all these problems. Once the project is developed, deploying brings up a new set of issues. That is, once TinyML is widespread, privacy, security, and model drift risks become widespread also. Another source of issues only arises when we scale the AI system to thousands or millions of devices. For example: producing and maintaining billions of microcontrollers have a huge impact in the form of carbon emissions. 

At the end of the paper, it was tried to assess the course’s impact. It was found that most students are 20 to 30 years old and working on their bachelor’s or master’s degrees. Unfortunately, the data indicates a gender gap: it weighs heavily towards men. Thus, future directions aim to close it. Another direction aims to provide the course in different languages.  

In conclusion, expanding access to these contents ensure that expertise diffuses broader. Moreover, the course design applied has a positive impact given the demographics of the students enrolled.

